# Poverty profiles and accessibility

Despite the significant growth of Mozambique since 1993, in this country more than half of the population still lives below the poverty line. The poverty reduction better performs in cities than in rural areas and in Mozambique the main urban growth happened in Greater Maputo Area. The rapid growth of the capital city involves negative externalities such as new urban poor, gentrification and underserved neighbourhoods.
The output attempt to measure the wealth and map the poverty in the Greater Maputo Area. Give a spatial dimension to this phenomenon allow to drive policies and perform services and new infrastructures.
The definition of wealth (or poverty) is generic and there are many variables that contribute to determine its value. From the literature review we identify key factors that influence wealth and poverty in Greater Maputo Area.
- access to drinking water at home
- access to information and communication technology
- access to public transport
- access to CBD (Central Business District)
- access to health facilities
- access to education system
- access to real estate market (affordable houses)
- having a permanent source of income or savings
- house construction material
- adequate sanitation at home
- source of reliable energy
- building density
- infrastructure density
- presence of formal / Informal business and jobs

Some of the items in the list concern to a place-based accessibility. This is another generic term. Recent researches inspect this kind of accessibility and in many cases show a strong correlation between poverty reduction and access to basic services and urban infrastructure. In particular, the analysis of accessibility in low and middle-income countries point out the primary role of public transport in the reduction of urban inequality.
The relation between public transport and formal jobs emerge also comparing bus stops and financial services (POS, ATM and banks). Financial services identify presence of formal commercial and economic activities, most of them fall within 250 m from a stop.
Therefore, measure accessibility for the listed factors and considering public transport, means point out segregation areas, where there is a lack of services and a significant distance from them. These areas are unequal, people who live there have difficulties to access to job opportunities, there is a high rate of unemployment and informal employment and a lower educational level. The literature proves that all these social costs are also related to public transport equity and efficiency.
Define where these areas are located will help to define policies and focus areas for investments and public interventions. Equity, inclusion, segregation and wealth can be analysed measuring accessibility to the following factors by public transport.
- accessibility to health system
- accessibility to education system
- accessibility to CBD (Central Business District)
- accessibility to public transport
- accessibility to water sources
- presence of financial services

Until now the attempt to map the poverty in Maputo consider census data that are aggregated to the district or province level. These data are not relevant due to their poor detail, therefore the indicators have been calculated at the neighbour level. 

## Access to health system

The access to healthcare facilities is crucial and has a strong impact on people and their wealth. To allow everyone equal access, it is necessary that health facilities are well distributed. The World Bank report on Maputo urban poverty and inclusive growth, estimates that “the number of poor households with no access to health facilities within 2km is three time as high as for non poor households”. The walking distance to a health facility is crucial, especially for poor people that do not own a car. The poor population reaches these facilities on foot, for this reason it is necessary to consider both the walking distance and the level of the sanitary structure that can be reached. To calculate this indicator, we considered the isochrones generated by each health facilities and their level, which is based on the available care services. The indicator is applied to morphological areas which identified a detailed and homogeneous subdivision of the metropolitan area, smaller than existing administrative areas (district or bairros).



## Access to education system

The walking distance and the level of the school considered are factors even more relevant than for the health system. In order to support school attendance, especially primary and secondary schools, these facilities must be easily accessible on foot by students. In the poorest areas it is crucial due to the high risk of dropping out of school. World Bank reports on Maputo show the correlation between poverty and greater distance from primary and secondary schools. The same indicator was created analysing international schools and universities, in these cases walking distance is less relevant, while high accessibility by public transport is more relevant.


## Access to public transport stops

Walking is the main travel mode in Maputo, especially poor people used to travel long distances on foot to reach their destination, they do not own a car and they save money of public transport tickets. 
However certain travels are too long for walking. Public transport is essential for poor, commuting distance is often a key factor for wealth. Recent resources demonstrate correlation between mode of transport and access to formal job opportunities.
Walking and public transport movements are often integrated, most of the people used to travel long distances to reach bus stops.
This indicator analyses accessibility to public transport stops, considering their walking distance from the trip origin. The weight of public transport is relevant in Maputo, approximately 60% of all non-walking trips were made by chapas and 17% by conventional buses.


## Access to CBD

In the Central Business District there is a high density of services and the main economic and commercial activities are concentrated there. Access to this place determines social inclusion, mainly because of the formal job opportunities are generated there. Several research studies have recently analysed the benefits and issues triggered by accessibility to CBD in low and middle-income countries main cities. Access to the CBD must be as fair as possible and public transport has a primary role in this sense. Public transport guarantees connection between CBD and periphery, which otherwise would be excluded from opportunities concentrated in the city center, especially by those who do not own the car. The indicator is affected both by the distance from public transport stops, and by the direction and the route of the individual lines that pass through those stops. For each area has been calculated the connection with every single public transport line (Mapathon 2019). For each public transport line has been calculated its connection with CBD. Then, travel times along the line and stop waiting times have been considered in processing the actual time taken to reach the CBD.


## Access to water sources

Strong disparity between population living in CBD and the periphery regards the access to water sources. In 2013, only CBD inhabitants have water access at homes, while all the others less than 10% access to drinking water this way. “A majority of residents instead rely on water for drinking either from piped water outside housing or standpipes, private or public”. Strong disparities also regard the population that has direct access to sanitations (bathroom, biological pits and sewers) as well concentrated in the city center. Unfortunately, there are no recent attempts to map those services, which are very useful for providing an indicator of poverty. 2008 data have been used to calculate the indicator, based mainly on the presence of water pipes and boreholes.

In order to define the access to water we considered water point (AdeM) and water network. The only one report to provide spatial dimension for water sources has been developed in 2011. World Bank developed a detailed map of water point in Beira, but no updated information have been found for Maputo.

#### References

Chen, G. (2017, July 19). Shared toilets as the path to health and dignity. [World Bank blogs](https://blogs.worldbank.org/water/shared-toilets-path-health-and-dignity)

Club of Mozambique. (2020, February 11). Club of Mozambique: [FIPAG promises to bring Maputo water supply to 40 per cent – AIM report](https://clubofmozambique.com/news/mozambique-fipag-promises-to-bring-maputo-water-supply-to-40-per-cent-aim-report-152353/)

Chaponniere, E., & Collignon, B. (2011). PPP with local informal providers aimed at improving water supply in the peri-urban areas of Maputo, Mozambique. WEDC, Loughborough University.


## Presence of inancial services

Financial services such as POS, ATM and banks indicates where formal activities are concentrated. The densities of these services confirm the presence of commercial and economic formal activities, but not the informal business. The difference between formal and informal activities and jobs is crucial in Maputo and recent researches address the topic, that has also strong relation with accessibility and public transportation. The density of financial services is particularly high in the CBD and along the main road axes, also seat for public transport lines. In the Greater Maputo area, 53% of all the POS are located within 150 meters from a bus stop, 75% within 250 meters and the percentages increase considering ATM, banks or money exchanges. Financial services and formal activities are related to public transport and they are concentrated in the inner city. They are sources of formal jobs opportunities and wealth. To calculate this indicator the presence of financial services within 250m was considered.

Consider the presence of ATM points and POS operation, in some way identify commercial areas and concentration of formal commerce (much rich)

Sousa, S. (2018, December 7). Street food in Maputo, Mozambique: availability and nutritional value of homemade foods. Nutrition and health, p. 37-46.


## Source of reliable energy

We considered two main source of data: Facebook energy map and NASA night light map.
For both we applied a score for the single HRSL pixel and then aggregate the result for morphological area. The final result is a range 1-10 for access to energy given by the average night lights per HRSL from FB map and night light NASA (blue band) per HRSL.
Both the sources has a very low detailed, so it is difficult to provide proper results.
>Building Electrical Grid Maps begins by taking monthly images from the VIIRS satellite, and creating a composite. We then apply a custom image processing filter to remove background and reflected light, and identify locations that consistently demonstrate night-time lighting. These then serve as a proxy for the existence of grid electricity. Using known electrical grids as templates based on data available from energydata.info, we employ a custom algorithm to connect the communities and infer grid paths based on their likelihood to follow roads, avoid water, and follow the shortest paths possible. For more technical information about this methodology, visit: https://code.fb.com/connectivity/electrical-grid-mapping/

#### References

Facebook Engineering. (2019, January 25). A new predictive model for more accurate electrical grid mapping. [Facebook Engineering](https://engineering.fb.com/connectivity/electrical-grid-mapping/)


## House material
The world bank report divide houses in two category for construction material: durable and non-durable.
Not considered because no available data about housing construction material have been founded.

## Urban morphology

## Roof material
## Infrastructure density
## Services/POI density

## References

World Bank. 2017. Greater Maputo : Urban Poverty and Inclusive Growth. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.

Jones, S., Egger, E.-M., & Santos, R. (2020, April 21). Analysis: The five criteria low income countries must have in place for lockdowns to work. [Club of Mozambique](https://clubofmozambique.com/news/analysis-the-five-criteria-low-income-countries-must-have-in-place-for-lockdowns-to-work-158244/)

Viana, D. L. (2015). (AUTO) Organização e forma urbana: combinando diferentes abordagens morfológicas naa nálise de Maputo. Porto: Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto.

Kayleigh B. Campbell, James A. Rising, Jacqueline M. Klopp, Jacinta Mwikali Mbilo (2019). Accessibility across transport modes and residential developments in Nairobi. Journal of Transport Geography, 77-90.
